---
layout: ../../layouts/Layout.astro
title: 'Shell login & Non-login shell'
pubDate: 2022-11-26
---

#### Shells in UNIX based systems can be started up in login and non-login modes

### Login shell

A login shell is a shell given to a user upon login into their user account. This is initiated by using the `-l` or `--login` option, or placing a dash as the initial character of the command name, for example invoking bash as -bash.

The general cases for having a login shell include:

- Accessing your computer remotely using ssh.
- Simulating an initial login shell with bash -l or sh -l.
- Simulating an initial root login shell with sudo -i.

A Login shell is started after a successful login, using /bin/login, by reading the /etc/passwd file. Login shell is the first process that executes under our user ID when we log in to a session. The login process tells the shell to behave as a login shell with a convention: passing argument 0, which is normally the name of the shell executable, with a “-” character prepended. For example, for Bash shell it will be -bash.

When Bash is invoked as a Login shell;

- → Login process calls /etc/profile
- → /etc/profile calls the scripts in /etc/profile.d/
- → Login process calls ~/.bash_profile
- → ~/.bash_profile calls ~/.bashrc
- → ~/.bashrc calls /etc/bashrc

### Non-login/Sub shell

Sub shell, also called a non-login shell is a shell started after the login process without the `-l` or `--login` option and without an extra dash before the command name.

A Non login shell is started by a program without a login. In this case, the program just passes the name of the shell executable. For example, for a Bash shell it will be simply bash.

When bash is invoked as a Non login shell;

- → Non-login process(shell) calls ~/.bashrc
- → ~/.bashrc calls /etc/bashrc
- → /etc/bashrc calls the scripts in /etc/profile.d/

Non login shells include the following.

- Shells created using the below command syntax.
  
  ```shell
  > # su | # su USERNAME
  ```

- Graphical terminals
- Executed scripts
- Any other bash instances

Credits :

- [Link1](http://howtolamp.com/articles/difference-between-login-and-non-login-shell/)
