---
layout: ../../layouts/Layout.astro
title: 'Importance of scientific temper'
pubDate: 2022-12-12
---

#### What is Scientific Temper ?

> Scientific temper refers to an attitude of logical, rational and scientific thinking. An individual is considered to have a scientific temper if he employs a scientific method of decision-making in everyday life. This involves repeatedly observing and verifying a fact before forming a hypothesis.

The term <strong>scientific temper</strong> was coined by India's first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, in his book 'The Discovery of India'. Nehru believed that scientific temper would play a crucial role in the nation's socio-economic development. The government at that period adopted various measures to inculcate a scientific attitude in a society ridden with <strong> superstitions and social evils like female infanticide, dowry and sati.</strong>

### Why ?

According to Article 51 (A) sub-section-H of the Indian Constitution, every citizen is obligated to develop scientific temper;

I dont think i need any more words on why it is required to develop by every indian.

### How it can help improve society ?

It's a normal scene in every household in india to believe in superstitions & follow traditional activities which were not based on any rationality & it has been followed by generations without reason. Not following those traditional activities is taken as going against elders & disrespecting elders. More often than not people are just blindly following these activities for mere satisfying the elders at home or due to parental pressure.

As once Great Man "Dr. Kalam sir" said, first change comes from within our own home & then it effects the soceity & then the ripple effects of those changes are visible at national & then at global level.

### How can one strive to achieve ?

if we stop following the baseless activities & do some research or question the existence of any such activity, then we are on our way.

Question everything that you see & also that you hear!.

Believe on facts.

Create awareness about it!

[credits](https://www.parentcircle.com/scientific-temper-meaning-importance-of-scientific-temperament-for-children/article)